# simplified_des

This is an implementation of simplified DES, as specified in Prof. Yener's lecture slides

des.py takes four command-line arguments
1. the name of the file to encrypt or decrypt
2. the name of the desired output file
3. An integer in the range [0, 1023]
4. 0, if you wish to encrypt a file, or a non-zero int if you wish to decrypt

for example, to encrypt secret\_message.txt using the value 793 as the key 
and write the output to ciphertext.txt,
simply use `python des.py secret_message.txt ciphertext.txt 793 0`. To decrypt 
ciphertext.txt, use `python des.py ciphertext.txt plaintext.txt 793 1`.

The program then attempts to open the file specified by the first command-line argument. 
If it succeeds, then it reads the file in one-byte chunks, and stores them in a list.
The program then iterates through the list, encrypts each byte, and then stores the 
encrypted byte in another list. Once every byte has been encrypted, each encrypted byte
is written to the output file specified on the command line.

The encryption algorithm itself works by taking a byte of data, permuting it as specified
in the lecture notes, splitting it into left and right halves, and then applying the
feistel function to the right half of the bits. The output of the feistel function
is then XORed with the left half of the bits. The new right bits are then set
as the output of the XOR, and the new left bits are simply the right bits before
they were put through the feistel function. This process is repeated again, and then
the left and right halves are recombined. They are then permuted inversely, and the result
is a byte of ciphertext.

The Feistel function, takes a key value and some bits
to be encrypted. It then expands the bits by inserting swapped pairs of bits in the text.
These expanded bits are then XORed with a key. The resulting number is then split into left and right halves,
each of which is used to get
a value from an S-box. The outer two bits determine the row index, and the inner two bits
determine the column index. A two-bit value is returned from each S-box, and these
values are recombined and permuted to form the output of the Feistel function.

The key for each round of DES is generated by taking the original 10-bit key value,
permuting it, then splitting it into halves. Each half of the key undergoes a circular
left-shift operation, then the halves are recombined, and the highest-order eight bits
are permuted and stored as the first key. The halves are then circular-shifted again and
permuted to form every subsequent key.

I have included some basic server and client code for transferring encrypted messages.
Right now, it can only send text from the client to the server and vice versa. I plan
on expanding it by making it multi-threaded to handle multiple clients, and I also
plan on adding file transfer capabilities so that sending larger messages is not as
cumbersome.
